hi everyone I'm Dr eatonson welcome to
heal NPD today I'd like to talk about a
concept called self as object
essentially individuals with
pathological narcissism don't relate to
themselves as a subject as a human
person who experiences thoughts and
feelings that are valid and important in
their own right
instead narcissists typically relate to
themselves as an object a thing that is
either doing well and therefore worth
something or not doing well and
therefore worthless
foreign
[Music]
people with pathological narcissism and
NPD tend to be preoccupied with concerns
about self-worth
the self is either experienced as in
alignment with an internal image of
perfection sometimes called an ideal
self or an ego ideal or it's experienced
as in some way falling short of that
ideal and therefore judged as worthless
they're seldom and in-between feeling
about the self where it's judged is
simply good enough in narcissism and NPD
notice that when I'm describing this
experience of self I'm using the word it
in many ways individuals with
pathological narcissism and NPD
experience themselves as in it as an
object that either performs or is broken
that's either shiny and beautiful and
pleasing to others and therefore of
value or is ugly and unwanted and
therefore worthless
for most narcissists the feelings about
the self are unstable and highly
variable and depending on the level of
instability in the personality the
perception of self can actually shift on
a dime one moment the person is
experiencing the heights of inflated
self-esteem and then the next they're in
the depths of empty depression and
despair this variability in self-image
is partly due to Reliance on certain
reality distorting defenses like
splitting and idealization and
devaluation
as the analyst melon and Klein famously
observed whenever there's a split in the
perception of self there's a
corresponding split in the perception of
objects the polarized lens through which
narcissists see themselves also applies
to other people who are sometimes
similarly viewed as perfect or worthless
but what's the root cause of this
instability
why do narcissists have such a difficult
time relating to themselves and to other
people as people
as irreducible combinations of quote
good and bad parts that have intrinsic
value and worth outside of how well they
measure up to some idealized image of
perfection
the answer lies in the ways that
relational trauma disrupts the
development of the self
when we're very young we don't actually
have a self-image
we sort of exist as a mishmash of
undifferentiated feeling States we're
regularly overwhelmed by intense
feelings of pleasure pain anguish Joy
Blissful merger and terrifying
separation
it's only over time that we begin to
make sense of these experiences perhaps
the first psychological adaptation is
separating pleasure from pain in a
meaningful way
these distinctions build on each other
as we go from infancy through our early
years until we sort of emerge from the
Oblivion of undifferentiated internal
experience around age four a substantial
aspect of this building of self occurs
through repeated interactions with other
people mostly with our caregivers an
infant who's screaming its pain and
discomfort into an empty room isn't
receiving any meaningful feedback about
what's happening and therefore its mind
exists in a kind of chaos but if we
place an empathic caregiver into that
equation one who gently picks the infant
up holds it in their arms who makes
soothing sounds and meaningful
connections with eye contact suddenly
the infant is lifted out of the chaos of
its internal world and it's met with a
being whose internal experience is
actually highly organized and who can
therefore see or find the subjectivity
of the infant we actually can't find
ourselves without the involvement of
other people
in the words of Donald winicot we need
to be found the sorts of experiences
that help infants build a self extend
into early childhood and Beyond kohut's
term for these sorts of experiences was
self-object experiences at first they're
very Hands-On sorts of interactions
suckling at the breast or the bottle
being held being swaddled being cared
for the long periods of unbroken eye
contact that typically occur between a
caregiver and an infant and as we grow
these self-object experiences tend to
become more abstract but throughout
Early Childhood when we're doing the
bulk of the work of building a self they
remain pretty concrete
Toddlers and young children need to be
held hugged and given feedback about
their thoughts and feelings adults need
to get down on their level showing them
that their experience in the world
matters and is important and is
perceptible to another being
all of this is in the service of helping
the child to create an experience of
selfhood that's firmly rooted in their
own subjectivity
they learn to feel their feelings and to
respond to them
and this basic connection to their
Center of being their authenticity is
what makes life and relationships feel
meaningful they develop fluency in their
feelings learning to factor them into
all situations and relationships they're
sort of allowed to have preferences and
tastes desires and feelings that emerge
spontaneously in the context of their
relationships with caregivers and those
around them their experience of being a
self is grounded in subjectivity and not
bound up with problematic and
complicated feelings like shame
humiliation Envy or rage against which
they're forced to defend by learning to
ignore or split off parts of their
subjectivity and their developing self
so now let's contrast this with the
sorts of self-object experiences that
are thought to lead to pathological
narcissism
it's long been observed that narcissists
are typically overvalued in childhood
for some Talent skill or attribute the
classic example would be a child who's
pushed to perform by a parent Who's
acting out their unrealized Ambitions
and attempting to live vicariously
through the child by making them a quote
star
such a parent is typically blind to the
experiences of their child it doesn't
matter to them that the child maybe
doesn't want to be on stage or perform
because the parents too preoccupied with
their own issues to see or discover the
child in this scenario the child is
actually an object to the parent rather
than a self if the parent could see and
relate to the child as a subject as a
self
then they would probably be horrified
that they were creating suffering in the
child to achieve their own ends
of course this kind of dynamic between
caregivers and children is rarely
limited to just one activity or one
Arena of life like performing on stage
such a parent typically treats their
child as an object in multiple areas of
life always pushing never really
listening or perceiving always trying to
quote make the child into something that
pleases the parent never really taking
the time or making the space to discover
or find who the child really is and how
the child really feels
and this failure to connect empathically
to the child is actually a kind of
neglect that impairs the child's ability
to create a strong and meaningful
connection to their own subjectivity it
makes it difficult to develop a sense of
themselves as a person rather than as an
object that is either pleasing or
displeasing to the people on whom they
depend when I work with narcissistic
individuals in Psychotherapy there's
often a profound lack of self-awareness
now to be sure many narcissists have a
keen intellectual awareness of
themselves they're often very good at
watching themselves and judging
themselves and sizing themselves up
especially in comparison to other people
they're often very good at sensing who
or what others need them to be and they
tend to pour themselves into whatever
mold seems available to them in a given
relationship and this is why others will
often experience narcissists as Charming
sensitive intelligent Etc at first and
it's only as the relationship develops
that the individual's emotional
impairments become more obvious
narcissists can be whatever you want or
need them to be they learn to do that in
childhood this to them is what it is to
be a self
the experience of self is inextricably
bound to the approval of others the
child forced onto the stage eventually
learns to act like they want to be there
they learn to mirror the parents need
for them to be a star because acting
like that is what gets noticed and
reinforced day after day this is the
part of them that gets sort of
discovered the only problem is that this
part of them that gets discovered or
found as a self isn't authentic it's
manufactured it's created to please the
parent and then of course the parent
discovers that part of the child because
that's all they were ever really looking
for in the first place the child's
actual authentic selfhood remains
undiscovered often even by the child as
they grow into adulthood this empty
place where an experience of self would
otherwise be becomes a source of
unbearable pain and anguish it's the
feeling of emptiness that individuals
with narcissism often describe
where a self should be there's instead a
void
that's the bad news
but here's the good news that void can
be filled not with grandiosity or
feelings of perfection and alignment
with the ideal self because that never
lasts and not by becoming the quote star
that Mom or Dad or whoever expected you
to be
the void can only be sustainably filled
by an authentic experience of self
and that must be allowed to grow
so if you identify with what I'm
describing it's because you weren't
discovered you weren't found by someone
who cared about you and showed you that
your feelings matter
you weren't treated as a self you were
treated as an object that existed to
gratify somebody else a consumable
Expendable self that's only as good as
it can perform and this is the
Unspeakable pain and shame that lives at
the center of narcissism and it's why
psychologist Stephen Johnson calls
narcissists used children however this
pain can often be a starting point for
developing the experience of self that
you lack
look inside and see what's there if it's
emptiness then go with that what's the
emptiness like how do you feel about it
does it make you feel scared numb angry
whatever you find try to make space for
it try to perceive the being that is
feeling it
you
if you find grief then go with that for
many feelings of grief sadness
disappointment or longing are often the
first strands of authentic
self-experience that can be followed and
don't worry that these nascent parts of
yourself consist mostly of bad feelings
your job is not to feel good it's not to
be shiny perfect or pleasing to anyone
around you your job is simply to be
to exist as a self with an intrinsic
value apart from what you can do or how
you can make anyone else feel you
sustained an injury a long time ago
maybe it wasn't done intentionally maybe
it was nobody's fault whatever the case
you didn't get what you needed you are
allowed to have feelings about that
you're allowed to suffer because of it
and paradoxically it's that very
suffering that might ultimately lead you
to something else
whatever about you may be false
the pain is real
it's undeniably yours and it's proof
that you exist that there's a being
there who feels and that's just the tip
of the iceberg in time that feeling will
lead to other feelings and they won't
all be unpleasant
okay so that's it for today if you like
this episode and you found it helpful
please be sure to hit the like button or
subscribe for more content like this in
the future it really helps with the
metrics and to get this content seed by
a wider audience
until next time take good care
[Music]